.\" Manpage for tbx.
.\" Contact dev@gualdron.com to correct errors or typos.
.TH tbx 1 "02 April 2020" "1.0" "tbx Manual Page"
.SH NAME
tbx \- Tabulate a delimited file at the command\-line
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BR tbx " [\fIoption\fP] \fIfile\fP [\fIfiles...\fP] "
.SH DESCRIPTION
tbx displays delimited data in tabular form. It supports files with fields delimited by one or more characters, or files following CSV rules delimited by a single character.  It works well with UTF-8 encoded files.  YMMV with other encodings.  \fBiconv (1)\fR is your friend.
.SH OPTIONS
tbx defaults to outputting the first 10 lines of your file, however, this behavior can be changed using the below options.
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-delim=<char>
Sets the delimiting character to use when parsing the file.  The default value is a TAB character.  However when using the \fB--csv\fR option the default value is a comma.
.TP
.BR \-C ", " \-\-csv
Parse CSV files.
.TP
.BR \-Q ", " \-\-csv\-quote=<char>
Sets the CSV quoting character when the \fB--csv\fR option is used.  The default value is a double-quote.
.TP
.BR \-H ", " \-\-header
Include the first line of the file in the output (pressumably the header).  Note that this is not necessary if you are listing from line 1 (\fB--from-line=1\fR), which is the default.
.TP
.BR \-x ", " \-\-transpose
Transpose the output so that file records are displayed as columns.  This is useful for inspecting a small number of rows from a wide file.
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-from\-line=<num>
Specify the line number in the input to start processing.  The default value is 1.
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-rows=<num>
Process this many rows starting from the \fB-l\fR value.  The default is 10, however, if \fB-x\fR is used, the default becomes 1.
.IP
If neither \fB-l\fR or \fB-r\fR are specified, processing starts with the first line in the file, and either 10 or 1 lines are displayed depending on whether \fB-x\fR is used.
.TP
.BR \-w ", " \-\-wrap=<num>
Wrap each column (by adding newlines) to this width.  This can be adjusted to prevent the table from exceeding the width of your terminal.  The default value is 50.
.TP
.BR \-b ", " \-\-bot\-line
Add a separating horizontal line above the last line of output.  This may be useful for tables diplaying totals (ignored if \fB-x\fR).
.TP
.BR \-F ", " \-\-full
Process the full file (ignoring \fB-r\fR).  Note that the data to be tabulated is loaded into memory, so, if you're trying to display a very large file, you may run out of memory.
.IP
The intent of \fBtbx\fR is not to display large amounts of data, but to zero-in on a small number of rows specified by judicious use of \fB-l\fR and \fB-r\fR.
.TP
.BR \-T ", " \-\-text
Render the table border in plain text.  The default is to use ANSI characters.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Display a short help message with an option summary.
.SH EXAMPLES
The easiest way to use tbx is to simply call it with the name of a tab-delimited file.
.TP
Let's say our file is \fBtest_file.tab\fR.
.TP
.EX
cat test_file.tab

HEADER_1        HEADER_2        HEADER_3        HEADER_4        HEADER_5
COL1ROW1        COL2ROW1        COL3ROW1        COL4ROW1        COL5ROW1
COL1ROW2        COL2ROW2        COL3ROW2        COL4ROW2        COL5ROW2
COL1ROW3        COL2ROW3        COL3ROW3        COL4ROW3        COL5ROW3
COL1ROW4        COL2ROW4        COL3ROW4        COL4ROW4        COL5ROW4
COL1ROW5        COL2ROW5        COL3ROW5        COL4ROW5        COL5ROW5
COL1ROW6        COL2ROW6        COL3ROW6        COL4ROW6        COL5ROW6
.EE
.TP
You can tabulate this as follows:
.TP
.EX
tbx test_file.tab

╔══════════╦══════════╦══════════╦══════════╦══════════╗
║ HEADER_1 ║ HEADER_2 ║ HEADER_3 ║ HEADER_4 ║ HEADER_5 ║
╠══════════╬══════════╬══════════╬══════════╬══════════╣
║ COL1ROW1 ║ COL2ROW1 ║ COL3ROW1 ║ COL4ROW1 ║ COL5ROW1 ║
║ COL1ROW2 ║ COL2ROW2 ║ COL3ROW2 ║ COL4ROW2 ║ COL5ROW2 ║
║ COL1ROW3 ║ COL2ROW3 ║ COL3ROW3 ║ COL4ROW3 ║ COL5ROW3 ║
║ COL1ROW4 ║ COL2ROW4 ║ COL3ROW4 ║ COL4ROW4 ║ COL5ROW4 ║
║ COL1ROW5 ║ COL2ROW5 ║ COL3ROW5 ║ COL4ROW5 ║ COL5ROW5 ║
║ COL1ROW6 ║ COL2ROW6 ║ COL3ROW6 ║ COL4ROW6 ║ COL5ROW6 ║
╚══════════╩══════════╩══════════╩══════════╩══════════╝
.EE
.TP
If we have a large CSV file, which might be too wide to fit on the terminal, we can still see the file layout by using the transpose (\fB-x\fR) option as follows:
.TP
.EX
tbx -x --csv fake_address_data.csv

╔═════╦═════════════╗
║ COL ║ FIELD NAMES ║
╠═════╬═════════════╣
║   1 ║ NAME        ║
║   2 ║ PHONE       ║
║   3 ║ EMAIL       ║
║   4 ║ COMPANY     ║
║   5 ║ ORG_ID      ║
║   6 ║ ADDRESS     ║
║   7 ║ CITY        ║
║   8 ║ POST_CODE   ║
║   9 ║ REGION      ║
║  10 ║ COUNTRY     ║
║  11 ║ COORDINATES ║
╚═════╩═════════════╝
.EE
.TP
If we also want to see two records starting at line 25 (or record 24 -- the header is not a record):
.TP
.EX
tbx --csv -x -l25 -r2 -H fake_address_data.csv

╔═════╦═════════════╦═════════════════════════════════╦══════════════════════════╗
║ COL ║ FIELD NAMES ║ RECORD 24                       ║ RECORD 25                ║
╠═════╬═════════════╬═════════════════════════════════╬══════════════════════════╣
║   1 ║ NAME        ║ Xandra                          ║ Deborah                  ║
║   2 ║ PHONE       ║ (0111) 939 2776                 ║ (01508) 93790            ║
║   3 ║ EMAIL       ║ Duis@lorem.edu                  ║ egestas.Fusce@risusa.edu ║
║   4 ║ COMPANY     ║ Ultricies Institute             ║ Luctus Ut LLP            ║
║   5 ║ ORG_ID      ║ 597661 6069                     ║ 169192 0696              ║
║   6 ║ ADDRESS     ║ P.O. Box 789, 6793 Morbi Avenue ║ 1654 In Av.              ║
║   7 ║ CITY        ║ Bautzen                         ║ Meridian                 ║
║   8 ║ POST_CODE   ║                            1643 ║ 80593-285                ║
║   9 ║ REGION      ║ SN                              ║ ID                       ║
║  10 ║ COUNTRY     ║ Lesotho                         ║ Fiji                     ║
║  11 ║ COORDINATES ║ -63.23149, -134.02611           ║ -2.98065, 75.3971        ║
╚═════╩═════════════╩═════════════════════════════════╩══════════════════════════╝
.EE
.TP
Note that we're using the \fB-H\fR option to display the header along with our data.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBcsv(3)\fR
.SH AUTHOR
Miguel Gualdron (dev at gualdron.com)
.SH LICENSE
.EX
Copyright (C) 2021 Miguel Gualdron

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free
Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your option)
any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU General Public License for
more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along with
this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple
Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307 USA

See the file COPYING in this distribution, or http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl.txt
.EE
